No peace – no prize
An empty chair with a sign »No Nobel Peace Prize 2015« would make history and hopefully call to attention to the greatest human suffering and maybe, just maybe, even stir the worlds political leaders to handle the conflict with the seriousness it deserves.


 In Danish: Ingen fred – ingen pris
The 2010 Nobel peace prize was awarded to a very symbolic “empty chair”. The real recipient Chinese dissident Liu Xiabo was at the time of the award ceremony being held incommunicado in a Chinese prison. The Chinese government bitterly protested the award to Liu Xiabo whom they considered a “criminal.” Not even a member of his family was able to travel to Oslo to receive the prize on his behalf.
The image of the award on an empty chair, and a picture of Liu Xiabo hanging on the wall, surrounded by dignitaries including Norway’s royal family sent a powerful image to the world: no individual or institution, not even a powerful government of a country such as China, could stop the aspiration to peace.
Today the Nobel Peace prize is to be awarded and we once again need a strong powerful image. It is being awarded at a time when world peace faces multiple violent conflicts, political upheavals and full-blown wars in places like Syria and Yemen.  The current refugee crisis is the worst since the Second World War. Even more disturbing is the fact that half of the 60 mio. people currently displaced by war are children – a scarred generation. We are living in an extraordinary chaotic time. That calls for extraordinary actions. When human suffering is at an epic proposition and children are swept to death by raging waters of the Mediterranean, it cannot be business as usual.
At the same time the powers that are supposed to steer the world towards peace are further fuelling the conflict. Russia and the US have made Syria their playground. European countries are competing who should receive fewer refugees. And arm-producing countries are making profits by sending more weapons to conflict areas.
While it is of course important to recognize that there are many unsung heroes working hard to build peace - and perhaps deserve a Nobel Peace prize – in these extraordinarily times The Nobel Peace Prize 2015 should not be awarded.
Liu Xiabo’s empty chair elicited an international attention to the suffering of dissidents in China, an empty chair with a sign »No Nobel Peace Prize 2015« would make history and hopefully call to attention to the greatest human suffering and maybe, just maybe, even stir the worlds political leaders to handle the conflict with the seriousness it deserves.
 
zach

