Danish forces bragged about arrest – the prisoner was killed
’The batallion has assisted Iraqi police in capturing a criminal charged with 19 homocides, robberies, kidnappings and smuggling,’ it was published on the official homepage of the Danish military, www.forsvaret.dk. A military legal expert participated in the operation and confirms that the prisoner, ’Bravo One’, was subsequently killed by the Iraqi police


 At 6am on April 10th 2005, victory is announced on a scratchy radio connection: »We have Bravo One,« a British group under Danish command communicates. Soon after, the announcement is confirmed. The operation has been completed successfully. Bravo One, a feared Iraqi criminal who has been terrorizing Highway 6 to Basra for a long time, has been captured.
Several weeks of intelligence gathering and preparations have been successfully concluded, an enthusiastic press officer the next day explains on the Danish Defence’s website. The trophy, Bravo One, is proudly paraded on the site, photographed while he is closely guarded by a British soldier. 
As Dagbladet Information can now reveal, the final conclusion of the operation was anything but a success. A few days after his capture, the prisoner was dead, tortured to death by the Iraqi police. By using the 391,832 leaked war logs to which Information has had privileged access, it has been possible to identify Bravo One and establish that his violent death was the one that an anonymous Danish soldier told the daily Ekstra Bladet about on Monday: »We celebrated the catch by taking pictures of him on an open truck with a hood over his head. When we handed him over to the Iraqi special forces, we talked about our feeling that he would probably not survive that,« said the 28-year-old soldier.
A couple of days later he and his patrol see Bravo One once again. This time he is dead, covered in blood and with no fingers, the soldier said. Military lawyer Jes Rynkeby Knudsen helped to identify and detain Bravo One or Abbas Allawi, as he is called according to the leaked logs: 
»There was only one such operation in the period when I was in Iraq, so I’m sure it is the same operation that is mentioned in Ekstra Bladet and in the log,« says Jes Rynkeby Knudsen who is currently Judge Advocate in the Danish Defense. He also confirms that Bravo One was killed by Iraqi policemen: »I saw pictures of his body afterwards,« he says. Jes Rynkeby will not discuss the operation in further detail because of military secrecy.
On the official website for the Danish military, www.forsvaret.dk, press officer Christer Nielsen was less reticent with details at the time: »Bravo One is a much feared Iraqi bandit ... A man who is wanted for at least 19 murders, numerous robberies, smuggling and kidnappings. The police did not dare touch him despite the fact that he ran his fuel smuggling business right outside the police station,« he wrote on the website.
»The Danish intelligence has worked hard and long gathering information about this man and his gang. The locals are scared out of their mind, and when asked about the man they stay silent with fear in their eyes. Even the police refused to identify him, even in photographs,« the press officer wrote at the time.
Describing the arrest, the website said: »A Danish officer named Anders and the military lawyer from the battalion move quickly towards the house where Bravo One has possibly been identified. To make sure that this is really Bravo One they have brought an interpreter and an informant wearing a black skiing mask. The informant is afraid and does not want to be recognized by Bravo One. Which is very understandable.«
The military lawyer mentioned on the website is Jes Rynkeby Knudsen. 
»The Danish group approached the house along muddy trails at the break of dawn. The interpreter tells the informant that he should just give him a subtle tug on the edge of his jacket if this really is Bravo One. To prevent Bravo One from getting an idea of his identity, he cannot speak. After the identification the soldiers will escort the informant to his vehicle and away from Bravo One.«
»The four men arrive at the house and go to an iron gate in a low brick wall around the building ... The hinges creak when the Danes open the gate ... Ten seconds later the interpreter feels a tug in his jacket. The tug becomes a strong jolt, and the interpreter turns his head. The informant nods his head twice, eagerly, and turns his back to everyone. Now he wants to be escorted away,« the press officer wrote: »He has identified Bravo One. Anders reports over the radio that everyone can breathe a sigh of relief. The operation is successful.«
During this operation against Abbas Allawi the Danes use exactly the same recipe that the Defence's military lawyers hope will exempt the Danish soldiers of any responsibility for his capture. On the website www.forsvaret.dk it seems that it is British soldiers who hand Abbas Alawi over to the Iraqi police after the arrest: »After having scanned the area, British soldiers escort Bravo One and the other detainees from the houses to the waiting area of the batallion and keep a watch over them until the Iraqi police soldiers take over. A total of four detainees are handed over to the police soldiers,« wrote press officer Christer Nielsen.
There is, however, no doubt that both the capture and the subsequent searches are operations led by the Danes. The British Corunna from the 1st Battalion of the Duke of Wellington’s Regiment was incorporated in the operation but is described as being »under Danish command«, which is also evident in the phrase: »at 11am the operation is called off, and the Danish battalion, including Corunna Coy, is transported back to Camp Danevang by the Piranhas of the scout squadron.«
According to the leaked documents from Iraq, Abbas Allawi and his three fellow prisoners are handed over to the Iraqi Tactical Security Unit, TSU, a special unit in the Iraqi police force: »ALL FOUR WERE HANDED OVER TO THE TSU AND TRANSPORTED TO AL JAMEAT IPS STATION (BASRAH),« reads a log dated April 10th 2005. Two days later the 28-year-old Danish soldier, who has told his story to Ekstra Bladet, meets Alawis family. They are about to bury his mutilated corpse. According to the Danish soldier Allawi's fingers are missing, but Jes Rynkeby Knudsen recalls no such detail: »It was shocking to see the pictures, he was clearly dead and there was blood, but I don’t think that his fingers were missing,« he says.
The al-Jameat police station, which also appears in the leaked document known as IPS 10 (Iraqi Police station number 10), is considered a problem already at this point, because the British-trained police corps is evolving into a local militia. The New Statesman and other media have written about this.
Half a year later the Britons believe that police at the al-Jameat police station is also responsible for the murder of two prisoners. The corpses are found filled with drilling holes in arms, legs and skulls after extensive torture. Eighteen months later the Britons have had it and storm the police station, setting free the remaining 170 prisoners kept under squalid conditions and blowing up the building.
© Information & The Guardian 2010
Translated by Mads Frese

