Denmark shares responsibility for murder of Iraqi detainee



 Danish military lawyer Jes Rynkeby Knudsen establishes today in the Copenhagen daily Information that an Iraqi who was taken prisoner by British soldiers in a Danish-led operation in Iraq on April 10th 2005 was killed by the Iraqi police. According to law experts, that makes the Danes partly responsible for his death: 
»This sounds like a nasty case. It is probably in violation of the European Convention on Human Rights. It is obvious that this is a problem for the Danish military,« says human rights expert and law professor at Copenhagen Business School, Claus Haagen Jensen. He continues: 
»If, at the time of operation, the Danes knew of a risk that that these prisoners when left to the Iraqi police would risk either torture or being killed, yes, then they have a clear responsibility not to leave prisoners to such a police.«
Lawyer and human rights expert at Amnesty International Claus Juul also does not have hesitations on the matter: »This happened at a time at which nobody should have had any doubts whatsoever that these prisoners risked being tortured. It is a violation of the European Convention on Human Rights. And if a prisoner was subsequently killed by the police, then of course Denmark shares the responsibility for that.«
Jes Rynkeby Knudsen stresses that British soldiers were formally responsible for the detention of the prisoner. This design was introduced in Iraq by the Danish Defence to exempt Denmark from the responsibility for captured Iraqis. But the scheme does not hold, says Claus Haagen Jensen: »The arrangement with the British forces changes nothing. It does not exempt the Danes from responsibility.«
Claus Juul agrees: »This is clearly an unsustainable circumvention. As I understand it, this was a Danish-led operation, and that means that they, too, are at least partly responsible«, adding: »Seeing this makes one worried about what is happening in Afghanistan right now. This information should make the Minister of Defence react immediately. She can’t just settle for an inquiry about Iraq; she has to find out whether the soldiers in Afghanistan are using the same model as in Iraq – arrests by proxy. If they do, then it must be stopped immediately.«
Danish Minister of Defence, Gitte Lillelund Bech, did not want to comment on the matter. 
© Information & The Guardian 2010 
Translated by Mads Frese

