Police seek to discredit climate protestors
Lawyers representing demonstrators, arrested during 2009 UN climate conference, question police efforts to undermine their clients’ credibility


 Police in Copenhagen have conducted a widespread investigation into the backgrounds of demonstrators arrested during the 2009 UN climate conference. The incriminating information they obtained was submitted on the opening day of the police’s appeal against a verdict in a civil case brought by 178 people pre-emptively arrested during a march on December 16, 2009.
While the Copenhagen City Court ruled last year that the mass arrest of almost 1,000 people was illegal, the police hope to justify the action by undermining the credibility of the protestors.
Lawyers representing almost half of the claimants have criticised the police’s intelligence gathering as being wasteful, irrelevant and undemocratic.
“The [investigations] have gone completely crazy and it looks like it may become the scandal of the century,” lawyer Christian Dahlager told Information newspaper.
He estimated that the intelligence gathering effort cost several million kroner.
In all 634 pieces of information about the arrestees have been registered by the police. Among the information dug up was that an arrestee drew a speech bubble on an election poster for right-wing leader Pia Kjærsgaard, that another had been expelled from Copenhagen’s Royal Gardens, while a third had been charged for being involved in a fight.
Politiken newspaper also revealed that the police examined the Facebook friends of 28-year-old Liv Brøndum, and wrote “her acquaintances include people who are registered by police as being ‘professional demonstrators’”.
The lawyers for the protestors question the legality of the police’s background investigations. And the information itself, they say, is irrelevant to the case.
“With the appeal, the police are trying to criminalise the complainants and in that way convince the court that it was okay to arrest them during the climate conference,” Knud Foldshack, another lawyer representing the protestors, told Politiken. “But you cannot use incriminating information they did not possess at the time of detention as an argument to justify their arrest.”
Dahlager argued a similar point to Information.
“What relevance does it have to the mass arrests during a climate protest in 2009 that an individual was arrested for public urination years before?”
Almost a thousand individuals were pre-emptively arrested on 12 December 2009 during a large organised demonstration. Police said they were targeting a radical group known as the ‘Black Bloc’ – which earlier in the march had thrown stones and fireworks at the Foreign Ministry building. Even though the police estimated that the group consisted of no more than 300 individuals, some 944 people were detained and made to sit for several hours in the cold with their arms tied behind their backs. Among the arrested were elderly people and Hare Krishna members.
A civil case was lodged against the police last year by 178 of the arrestees – 95 of whom are foreign citizens – seeking damages for unlawful detainment. In defence, the police argued that their action was justified under the increased powers granted to them by parliament in the weeks before the conference – and that the mass arrest was necessary in order to avert ‘significant danger to public order’.
But last December the court ruled that the arrests were not legal, and awarded damages of between 5,000 and 9,000 kroner to each of the claimants.
The police now hope to have the ruling overturned by the Eastern High Court. But Foldshack, speaking to Information, said he was concerned that the police’s intelligence gathering effort would set a dangerous precedent.
“Now if you complain about being detained and having your arms tied behind your back and made to sit on the ground for hours, you will get your whole background looked into.”

