ACTA to block life-saving medicines for the world's poorest
ACTA, the controversial trade agreement, will have implications that go beyond matters of free speech online. The agreement will exclude developing countries from access to essential generic drugs, according to several NGO’s 


 The international agreement to combat counterfeiting known as ACTA will end up costing lives. A number of NGO's have come out to make a warning that the controversial trade agreement will not only punish internet pirates and manufacturers of counterfeit luxury handbags. It will also block the access to essential generic drugs, with devastating consequences for millions of patients in the Third World.
»Ultimately, this is going to be a matter of life and death. It is a potential consequence of the agreement is that many of the hundred thousands of people, for instance people diagnosed with HIV / AIDS, will lose access to their treatment,« says Michael Gylling Nielsen to the Danish daily newspaper Information. He is the director of the Danish chapter of Doctors Without Borders (MSF), an international humanitarian aid organization which provides medical care in hot spots and developing countries. From MSF's head office in Geneva, Katy Athersuch, an expert on the matter, points out at least three problems in the agreement with respect to generic drugs.
· Civil trademark cases are still very much part of the enforcement scope and there is no option for countries to exclude this. In reality unnecessary and harmful interruptions to medicine supplies have taken place and will continue if trademark infringement is not also excluded.
· Patents will only be excluded for a particular party (state) if they explicitly request this. There will be pressure on them to include patents within the scope and it is likely that many countries will do this and therefore all harmful impacts previously outlined
· The enforcement provisions include provisional measures such as the use of injunctions on a mere suspicion or allegation of patent or trademark infringement. This is extremely problematic and goes beyond what is required under the TRIPS agreement. By generally focusing on harsh remedies before infringement has been proven, ACTA will shift the risk on to the generic manufacturers rather than waiting until the IP holder has proved its case. This will have a chilling effect on the manufacturers of generic medicines.
· None of the safeguards in the WTO TRIPS agreement are in ACTA. The obligations of ACTA go way beyond TRIPS, yet whereas TRIPS had corresponding safeguards, ACTA has not included these.
In an op-ed article published in today's Daily Information, three Danish ministers make a guarantee that ACTA will not »change the opportunities available today to provide cheaper drugs for HIV / AIDS sufferers in Africa, among others«.
Nonetheless, Michael Gylling Nielsen insists that even though ACTA may not have been conceived with the intention of harming developing countries, harm will be an unintended consequence. The reason is that ACTA gives too much power to the manufacturers of original drugs.
»If an original pharmaceutical manufacturer is unhappy with a generic producer, he can put the production to a standstill for months merely by suggesting that the product does not live up to the patent rights,. It may take a long time to clarify whether a patent has been infringed and throughout that period, the generic manufacturer cannot produce his medicine. This means that patients do not get their daily medication, which can be life-threatening for them, as well as increasing the risk of infection for others,« said Michael Gylling Nielsen.
The non-governmental organization Africa Contact, which cooperates with grass roots movements and organizations in Africa on matters of social and economic rights, is also concerned about the ACTA agreement.
»Concern for corporate patents outweighs considerations of people's health and lives in this agreement - there is no doubt about that,« says information officer in the Africa Contact, Morten Nielsen, to Information.
 
translated by Lotte Folke Kaarsholm

